# Supermarket-DB

# Abstract 
A database was created for use in a supermarket to make sure the daily workflow is organized and managed efficiently. Throughout the report an introduction to the database is described, the major function of the database is explained, the ER diagram showcasing all the tables and how they relate to each other is shown, technical details are explained describing each part of the database, a conclusion describing the results of the database, and finally group contributions. The database also has a view function in case the user wants to get specific details from the database. 
  
# Introduction
The purpose of this database is to be used in a supermarket. In modern times, supermarkets and other commercial stores are moving to the digital world and would like their services to be offered electronically. Also, it is important for technology to aid the progression of business. A database has a practical application with supermarkets. It is common for a supermarket to have tens of thousands of items; a database can archive and handle this kind of data easily as this leads to efficiency. Many of the benefits of a Database Management System are taken advantage in a supermarket, they include: ease of data sharing, data integrity, minimal data inconsistency and corruption, improved security. The main components of the supermarket that the database will handle are mainly the transactions, inventory and employees.
  
# Major function of the database 
This database functions as a informational database where branch managers and store managers can access inventory and employee information. The inventory information tells us things like item name, item price and item stock. The employee information tells us things like employee names, employee ID numbers, and position. The database also goes further than items and employees. The database also functions as an account book for a supermarket because you can record transactions. This includes the date and payment type. These two are useful to see info like which days the supermarket is the busiest or how most people pay for their purchases.
  
The website can be used as the interface to control the database as well sort the data using a search parameter. For example, if you want to search a specific employer using their ID or if you are trying to see how many of your employees are making over a certain amount of money. You can also sort items by their department type. The database is built so that you can continue to add more functionality to the interface and the database itself. You can add more queries like sorting suppliers by location, calculating total amount of transactions per month. The front end of the database was designed with necessary implementations to show its potential usability. 

# Proposed DB System: The ER diagram of the database 
The ER diagram shown showcases the different tables and how they relate to one another. The transaction table references the employees table with empID to show who was presents at the time an item was purchased. The employees table references the department table with departmentName to show which employee works in which department. The items table references the department table with departmentName to show which item belongs to which department. The suppliers table is separate because each supplier may bring multiple items that fall in to different departments and it being separate avoids confusion. Also items ordered differ from week by week. The branches table is separated as well because it’s going to solely be used by the owner of the branches to keep track of their businesses around the boroughs. There are also two views in the ER diagram. One view shows specifically the managers shift to quickly get information on a particular manager on a certain day. The second view shows the transaction date of every item sold from a certain time frame.

# Technical details 
The database has six tables: Department, Items, Employees, Suppliers, Branches and Transactions. The Department table pertains to which department an item or employee belongs to. For example, milk will be found in the dairy department and John Smith works in that department as well. 

Items refers to the items the supermarket has in stock. These items are the typical items found in a supermarket such as produce, meats, and foodstuffs. The Items tables contains information of the various items the supermarket, such as the items barcode, name, department to which it belongs to, the isle is can be found in, as well as the price and how many of the item are in stock. The foreign key of this table is departmentName, as it is the primary key of the department table. 

The Employees table holds the employee’s identification number (which is also the table’s primary key), the employee’s name, position, which department they work in, what shift they work as well as their salary. 

The Suppliers table holds information about the wholesale suppliers who provide the supermarket with inventory. This table contains the supplier’s identification number, the name of supplier, the address, phone number and any other details that can be added to describe a particular supplier. For example, Driscoll Foods supplies the supermarket with produce items, so produce is added for the other details column. Like many supermarkets, this one also has other branches. The information of about the other supermarket branches goes in the branches table and contains: the branch number, branch manager, branch name along with the branch’s address and phone number.

The transactions are also kept inside the database. The information that will be stored in the transaction table will be: the transaction number, the date and time of the transaction, the employee that carried out the transaction, the overall cost of the transaction and the method of payment that was used. 

In favor of usability and performance, a front end interface was created. The front end interface is a web application written in PHP and with the use of a web host. The database was inserted into the control panel of the web host and from there, queries were added to the web page’s source code. These queries include showing all the items in a certain department, details about a certain supplier, the employees that make more than a given salary and so forth.

# Discussions & Conclusions 
The database was successful in executing all the SQL statements that were created providing the user with the correct data. Throughout the project the only issues that came up was accurately using foreign keys or a few syntax errors for some tables and working together as a team the issue was quickly resolved. Overall as a team the database was successful by creating tables, an ER diagram, inserting data, identifying the different keys, and creating views to make sure the user gets the correct information from the database. A front end was added as well after the database was created.


